README.md, before:

# Color-By-Number
Color-By-Number is a program that utilizes Dr. James Plank's graphing utility jgraph to convert images into color-by-number games. It works best with digital art, but it works reasonably well even with real-life photos.

## Using Color-By-Number
Installing ImageMagick is recommended. I haven't tested how `convert` and its options like `-resize` work without it.
ImageMagick can be installed on Linux operating systems with `sudo apt install imagemagick`.

After cloning this repository, simply type "make" to compile the program. The executable in /bin/ should already be current, but do it just to make sure.
Running "make clean" will remove the executable and all object files.
Make will also run the program on all of the images in the /examples/ directory, outputting each image's color-by-number in /examples/pdfs.

### Shell script color-by-number.sh
The easiest way to use the program is by using this shell script. It will automatically convert your image into a format that the program can read, as well as pass all arguments to the program in the correct order.
```
sh color-by-number.sh <input-image> <output-name> <color> <size> <landscape> <options>
```

### Required Arguments

* `<input-image>` The filename of the input image. Any image type that can be converted by ImageMagick is supported.
* `<output-name>` The filename for the outputted color-by-number. Extensions .pdf and .jpg are supported. I *highly* recommend using .pdf for denser images, as .jpg will likely compress the image too much to be readable.
* `<color>` The number of colors to use from /color/robust. Currently there are 6 options: `robust`, `simpler`, `dull`, `flat`, `ROYGBIV`, and `extreme`. `robust` provides the most detail without being ridiculous, and each option beyond reduces the number of colors used. `ROYGBIV` and `extreme` are mostly novelties because they create images with too few and too many colors, respectively. When using the `extreme` command, colors in the legend will only be displayed with their hex codes. The `extreme` command outputs every color in the original image with no approximation, so it is incredibly unlikely that all of the colors in the legend will be displayed without running off the page.
* `<size>` The number of pixels in the output image. The shell script will automatically resize the image to fit this parameter. The options are as follows: `micro`: <= 250 pixels, `tiny`: <= 1500 pixels, `small`: <= 10,000 pixels, `medium`: <= 20,000 pixels, `large`: <= 30,000 pixels, and `full`: number of pixels in the original image. When using `large`, I highly recommend installing a pdf viewer such as qpdfviewer, as the number labels will likely be too small to view with the default pdf viewer. I also do not recommend converting large images to jpg, as noted previously.
* `<landscape>` Specifying `-L` will create the color-by-number output in landscape orientation. This is recommended for images with width that greatly exceeds the height, but it does not guarantee that it will fit on the page. This is technically an optional parameter, as putting no parameter will instead begin the list of optional parameters.
### Optional Arguments
* `print_ppm` This will print a .ppm of the image with resizing and approximated colors to a file called "output.ppm". This is what the original image will look like after you finish the color-by-number. If you would like to output the finished .ppm of multiple different images, simply rename each output or move them to a different directory, or it will be overwritten.
* `print_hex` This will print each color's hex code next to its name in the legend. This can be helpful if the coloring tool you're using does not have names that match up with those stored in this program.
* `show_axis` By default, the color-by-number will not have an x or y axis, but this will show both of them.
* `title` This allows you to give your color-by-number a title that will appear centered below the image. The string for the title must *immediately* follow `title`, and if it is to contain spaces, separate each word with an underscore.

### Use the executable directly

If you'd like to use the executable directly, you have to do a couple things first. First, you should convert your image into a size that is more appropriate for the program. See the `size` command for recommendations. Second, make sure that your image is converted to the P3 .ppm format. P6 is the other most common one, and it will not work.

The executable can be run from the main directory like this: `./bin/color-by-number <size> <fontsize> <options> < input.ppm`

`<fontsize>` tells the program how large the numbers inside color blocks should be, and this can be a bit tricky to get right. Even within my shell script, it may not be perfect for every image.

You will also have to run `jgraph -P jgraph.txt | ps2pdf - output.pdf` to create the color-by-number image.

### Customize color/robust

You can add and remove colors from the color file to further customize your color-by-number game. If you would like to add a color follow these steps:
* Determine what the "dominant" color is. Whatever color, R, G, or B has the largest value, place your new color in that section denoted by heading `//color`. If the largest value is in more than one section, place your color under both headings. If your color is a shade of gray, place it under the `//gray` heading.
* The line describing your color must be formatted exactly like this: `R G B #hexcode name`. Please make sure to include the "#". The name can be any length, separated by spaces.

#### Contact me

I tried my best to create defaults that work with many images. However, images have many different formats, color patterns, and resolutions, so I couldn't get everything perfect. If you encounter any bugs, or if the formatting of the output is not correct or looks silly, please contact me at zcreech@vols.utk.edu.

Commit message:

Added warning about comments in .ppm files.

README.md, after:

# Color-By-Number
Color-By-Number is a program that utilizes Dr. James Plank's graphing utility jgraph to convert images into color-by-number games. It works best with digital art, but it works reasonably well even with real-life photos.

## Using Color-By-Number
Installing ImageMagick is recommended. I haven't tested how `convert` and its options like `-resize` work without it.
ImageMagick can be installed on Linux operating systems with `sudo apt install imagemagick`.

After cloning this repository, simply type "make" to compile the program. The executable in /bin/ should already be current, but do it just to make sure.
Running "make clean" will remove the executable and all object files.
Make will also run the program on all of the images in the /examples/ directory, outputting each image's color-by-number in /examples/pdfs.

### Shell script color-by-number.sh
The easiest way to use the program is by using this shell script. It will automatically convert your image into a format that the program can read, as well as pass all arguments to the program in the correct order.
```
sh color-by-number.sh <input-image> <output-name> <color> <size> <landscape> <options>
```

### Required Arguments

* `<input-image>` The filename of the input image. Any image type that can be converted by ImageMagick is supported.
* `<output-name>` The filename for the outputted color-by-number. Extensions .pdf and .jpg are supported. I *highly* recommend using .pdf for denser images, as .jpg will likely compress the image too much to be readable.
* `<color>` The number of colors to use from /color/robust. Currently there are 6 options: `robust`, `simpler`, `dull`, `flat`, `ROYGBIV`, and `extreme`. `robust` provides the most detail without being ridiculous, and each option beyond reduces the number of colors used. `ROYGBIV` and `extreme` are mostly novelties because they create images with too few and too many colors, respectively. When using the `extreme` command, colors in the legend will only be displayed with their hex codes. The `extreme` command outputs every color in the original image with no approximation, so it is incredibly unlikely that all of the colors in the legend will be displayed without running off the page.
* `<size>` The number of pixels in the output image. The shell script will automatically resize the image to fit this parameter. The options are as follows: `micro`: <= 250 pixels, `tiny`: <= 1500 pixels, `small`: <= 10,000 pixels, `medium`: <= 20,000 pixels, `large`: <= 30,000 pixels, and `full`: number of pixels in the original image. When using `large`, I highly recommend installing a pdf viewer such as qpdfviewer, as the number labels will likely be too small to view with the default pdf viewer. I also do not recommend converting large images to jpg, as noted previously.
* `<landscape>` Specifying `-L` will create the color-by-number output in landscape orientation. This is recommended for images with width that greatly exceeds the height, but it does not guarantee that it will fit on the page. This is technically an optional parameter, as putting no parameter will instead begin the list of optional parameters.
### Optional Arguments
* `print_ppm` This will print a .ppm of the image with resizing and approximated colors to a file called "output.ppm". This is what the original image will look like after you finish the color-by-number. If you would like to output the finished .ppm of multiple different images, simply rename each output or move them to a different directory, or it will be overwritten.
* `print_hex` This will print each color's hex code next to its name in the legend. This can be helpful if the coloring tool you're using does not have names that match up with those stored in this program.
* `show_axis` By default, the color-by-number will not have an x or y axis, but this will show both of them.
* `title` This allows you to give your color-by-number a title that will appear centered below the image. The string for the title must *immediately* follow `title`, and if it is to contain spaces, separate each word with an underscore.

### Use the executable directly

If you'd like to use the executable directly, you have to do a couple things first. First, you should convert your image into a size that is more appropriate for the program. See the `size` command for recommendations. Second, make sure that your image is converted to the P3 .ppm format. P6 is the other most common one, and it will not work. 

Also, be wary of comments in the converted .ppm file. The program doesn't check for comments, and they will crash it. I recommend using the command I used in the shell script to remove comments: `sed -i '/^#/d'`

The executable can be run from the main directory like this: `./bin/color-by-number <size> <fontsize> <options> < input.ppm`

`<fontsize>` tells the program how large the numbers inside color blocks should be, and this can be a bit tricky to get right. Even within my shell script, it may not be perfect for every image.

You will also have to run `jgraph -P jgraph.txt | ps2pdf - output.pdf` to create the color-by-number image.

### Customize color/robust

You can add and remove colors from the color file to further customize your color-by-number game. If you would like to add a color follow these steps:
* Determine what the "dominant" color is. Whatever color, R, G, or B has the largest value, place your new color in that section denoted by heading `//color`. If the largest value is in more than one section, place your color under both headings. If your color is a shade of gray, place it under the `//gray` heading.
* The line describing your color must be formatted exactly like this: `R G B #hexcode name`. Please make sure to include the "#". The name can be any length, separated by spaces.

#### Contact me

I tried my best to create defaults that work with many images. However, images have many different formats, color patterns, and resolutions, so I couldn't get everything perfect. If you encounter any bugs, or if the formatting of the output is not correct or looks silly, please contact me at zcreech@vols.utk.edu.
